# Abstract Factory
**Abstract Factory** is a creational design pattern that lets you produce families of related objects without specifying their concrete implementations. In other words, the Abstract Factory pattern defines an abstract interface for creating related objects without specifying their exact types. This allows us to create objects based on a family of related objects at the abstract level versus creating individual objects.

This is useful in situations where we want to create objects based on a certain theme or context. For example, if we are building a GUI application, we might want to create a set of related objects, such as windows, buttons, and menus, that all have the same look and feel. By using the Abstract Factory pattern, we can create these objects without specifying their concrete classes, which makes it easy to change the theme or context of our application.

To implement the Abstract Factory pattern in Golang, we first define an interface that defines methods for creating related objects. This interface is called the abstract factory. We then define concrete implementations of this interface, which are called concrete factories. The concrete factories are responsible for creating the actual objects. Client code works with factories only through their abstract interfaces. This lets the client code work with any factory variants, created by the factory object. A new concrete factory class is created and passed to the client code.

In our companion [code example](/SoftwareDevelopmentDesignPrinciples/AbstractFactory), we are buying a sports kit, a set of two different products: a pair of shoes and a shirt. You would want to buy a full sports kit of the same brand to match all the items. The abstract factory will help us create sets of products so that they would always match each other.